This is the Dilbert Strip Index (finder_dsi), used by the *Dilbert
Strip Finder* at <http://www.bfmartin.ca/finder>.

It contains:

- The source data in JSON format used to index the content of
  the Dilbert comic strips so a full-text search can be performed.

- Some programs written in Ruby to load the data into a MariaDB
  database, test the validity of the data, and some command-line
  utilities to report and maintain the data.

You can reach me at <http://www.bfmartin.ca/contact>

This project is dedicated to all fans of Dilbert and to Scott Adams in
particular for creating the comic strip.


# Copyright and Licenses

## JSON files

The JSON data files (dsistrips.json and dsibooks.json) are copyright
1999 - 2017 by Byron F. Martin. They are licensed under the [Creative
Commons Attribution 2.5 Canada
license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.5/ca/).  The short
version is that you can do whatever you want with these files as long
as you give me credit for creating them. A link to my site will be
good, though it's not required.

## Programs written by me

The program files (Ruby and Rakefile files) that were written by me
(which is everything except the bundled module `lib/dsi/stem.rb`) are
donated to the public domain. Do whatever you want with them.

## Bundled module

A bundled Ruby module for word stemming (`lib/dsi/stem.rb`) is
copyright by its author(s). Please refer to its documentation for its
license information. It was obtained from
<http://tartarus.org/~martin/PorterStemmer/ruby.txt>.


# JSON files

## Dates

All dates are in the format YYYY-MM-DD.


## dsistrips.json

This is the main data file that describes each Dilbert strip.  For
each strip, the JSON file contains:

- Date of newspaper publication.

- Synopsis, a one or two sentence description of the strip.

- Subject (optional), the main topic.

- Keywords (optional), many words to describe the action and important
  concepts.

- Characters (optional), the characters with speaking parts.

- Saga (optional), to mark the beginning of three or more strips with
  a common theme.

- Notes (optional), to describe important items about the strip, like
  the first appearance of a character.

- Comment (optional), text about the strip for my own purposes and is
  not meant to be displayed in search results.


## dsidialog.json

This data is not included here but is generated from some text files
available on the Internet. The programs format the data for easy
searching.

This file is generated by running the command

        rake dialog:prepare

This will download the necessary file(s) from their respective sites
and generate dsidialog.json. See the Rakefile for details on how this
happens.


## dsibooks.json

NOTE: This file is retired, and is *not* maintained any more. You can
find all strips online, so finding them in books is superfluous. This
file stays, but has no books past 2014.

This describes each Dilbert comic collection and its contents.  For
each book, the file contains (all are required):

- a one word code id for the book.

- the book title

- the layout of a week of strips, beginning with Sunday, and
  separated by commas.  Most books are laid out as 1,3,3 which means:

  - Sunday on one page

  - three more strips on the next page

  - three more strips on the next page.

- A list containing the start and end dates and the page number that
  they start on. This is a list because sometimes strips are not in
  chronological order.

# Ruby Requirements

If you like to play around with the Ruby programming language, there
are some example programs included in this package. To make them work
you will need to have the following software packages installed. Your
operating system's package manager should be able to help with these.


- Ruby, at least version 2.3.

- Rake

- The following ruby gems

  - json        (to parse JSON files)
  - net/http    (to fetch dialog file)
  - trollop     (to parse command line options)
  - rake_notes  (shows TODOs and FIXMEs in code)

  Try: `gem install <gemname>`


# Database

Some programs refer to a database. The SQL will work with MariaDB, and
uses the following table definitions. The search feature relies on
MariaDB's full text indexing.

# bin directory

There are several programs included to work with the DSI data.

If the program name begins with 'dsi', then its purpose is to maintain
or report on the dsi data.

- dsi-generate-dialog.rb

  this will read raw dialog files (as downloaded from different web
  locations) and merge them into a standard format JSON file.

- dsi-key.rb

  this will read the dsistrips json file and format it for printing.
  it takes the keywords or characters or subjects, and prints a list
  of dates that contain that item.

- dsi-notes.rb

  this will read the dsistrips json file and print all items with
  notes.  Useful for browsing and debugging.


If the program name begins with 'finder', then it generates data to
update the Finder web site.

- finder-load.rb

  reads dsistrips and creates lines to be loaded into the bfmartin.ca
  database.  See the database schema in the README.  also loads dialog
  if available, otherwise inserts nulls.

- finder-reindex.sh

  a wrapper to do everything. it will download all required files,
  reformat them, and load the database.

# Feedback

If you have questions or feedback, you can reach me at
<http://www.bfmartin.ca/contact>

You can visit the *Dilbert Strip Finder* web site at
<http://www.bfmartin.ca/finder>
